When all other song birds fail to take advantage of a house built for
them, the wren may still be counted on. Almost any sort of home from a
tin can or hollow gourd on up is satisfactory if put in a safe place
and provided with an opening 1" or slightly less in diameter, so the
sparrows must stay out, Figs. 4 and 5. Good homes are shown in Figs.
10, 14, 15, 16 and others.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. WREN AND RUSTIC HOUSE.]


HOUSE FINCH.

The house finch has made many enemies because of its fondness for
cultivated fruits and berries. However, it has some redeeming
features in its song and beauty. The nest is usually placed in the
fork of a limb--evergreens being favorite nesting places. The house
shown in Fig. 51 is suitable for these birds but is also acceptable to
wrens.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. WRENS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6. FLICKER.]


WOODPECKER.

The favorite of this interesting family is the little downy, Fig. 7.
Living largely upon harmful grubs and insects, this bird does an
immense amount of good by protecting our forests from insect scourges.
Woodpeckers do not build nests as most birds do, but excavate a deep
cavity in some dead tree leaving a quantity of chips at the bottom on
which the eggs are laid. Nesting boxes should be of the rustic type
made as shown in Fig. 12, leaving some sawdust mixed with a little
earth in the cavity. These houses should be placed on trees in a park
or orchard. Boys should be able to tell the difference between the
woodpeckers beneficial to man and the sapsucker whose misdeeds often
cause considerable damage to fruit trees. A nuthatch is also seen in
Fig. 7 enjoying a meal of sunflower seed.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. DOWNY WOODPECKER (ABOVE) NUTHATCH (BELOW).]


FLICKER.

The flickers spend much of their time on the ground in search of ants
which form the larger percentage of their food. Since ants sometimes
cause considerable trouble for other birds, a pair of flickers are
worth cultivating for the sake of the work they can do. Artificial
nesting boxes of sufficient depth and size are quite readily used,
Figs. 6, 20 and 25.


MARTIN.

Nearly everyone knows swallows of one variety or another. The most
beautiful of the family are the martins, Fig. 8. This bird is of great
service against the inroads of wasps, bugs and beetles. It prefers to
live in colonies even though the males fight bitterly at times. Martin
houses should have at least several rooms, each separate from all the
others. Houses have been built to accommodate fifty and more families.
Smaller ones are shown in Figs. 8, 9, 13 and 45.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. A MARTIN COLONY.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9. THE PEER GYNT COTTAGE FOR MARTINS.]

Fig. 9 is a miniature reproduction of Peer Gynt's cottage for a martin
house. This house was not only an attractive thing to make, but
martins selected it for their home during the past summer.




CONSTRUCTION OF BIRD HOUSES.


Bird houses may be divided into three main classes: (1) those made of
sawed lumber to specified dimensions; (2) the rustic type made of (a)
slabs of wood with the bark left on, or (b) pieces of tree trunk, or
(c) of sawed lumber trimmed with bark or twigs; and (3) cement or
stucco houses. In each case the entrance should slant slightly upward
to keep the rain out.

[Illustration: FIG. 10. WREN HOUSES.]

Almost any sort of lumber may be used, but birds take most readily to
that which has been weathered out of doors. A kind should be used
which does not warp or check badly; white pine and cypress meet these
requirements and are worked with ease. Yellow poplar is used and cedar
with or without the bark left on has its friends for houses of the
first or second classes.

Nesting boxes of sawed lumber should be painted on the outside to
improve their appearance and to preserve them against the effect of
the weather. It is often wise to leave a small amount of unpainted
surface around the entrance, and all paint should be thoroughly dry
before houses are expected to be occupied. Colors selected will depend
somewhat upon the neighborhood, but white, grey, dull greens or browns
are often used.


DIMENSIONS OF NESTING BOXES.

The following table, copied from Farmers Bulletin, No. 609, U. S.
Dept. of Agriculture, gives in small space valuable information about
dimensions that experience and investigation have indicated as good
for particular varieties of birds. This list includes many varieties
that do not commonly live in houses built for them, however. As time
goes on, we may expect to find more of these birds living in our
nesting boxes because they are apt to seek the same sort of home as
the one in which they were reared. The table is given to be of service
to those wishing to plan new houses not shown here.

_Dimensions of nesting boxes for various species of birds._

=================+==========+==========+==========+==========+=========
                 |   Floor  |   Depth  | Entrance | Diameter |  Height
		     Species.     |    of    |    of    |  above   |    of    |  above
		                      |  cavity. |  cavity. |  floor.  | entrance.|  ground.
				      -----------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+---------
				                       | _Inches._| _Inches._| _Inches._| _Inches._|  _Feet._
						       Bluebird         |  5 by  5 |        8 |       6  |   1-1/2  |  5 to 10
						       Robin            |  6 by  8 |        8 |   [1]    |   [1]    |  6 to 15
						       Chickadee        |  4 by  4 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   1-1/8  |  6 to 15
						       Tufted titmouse  |  4 by  4 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   1-1/4  |  6 to 15
						       White-breasted   |          |          |          |          |
						               nuthatch |  4 by  4 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   1-1/4  | 12 to 20
							       House wren       |  4 by  4 |  6 to  8 | 1 to  6  |     7/8  |  6 to 10
							       Bewick wren      |  4 by  4 |  6 to  8 | 1 to  6  |   1      |  6 to 10
							       Carolina wren    |  4 by  4 |  6 to  8 | 1 to  6  |   1-1/8  |  6 to 10
							       Dipper           |  6 by  6 |        6 |       1  |   3      |  1 to  3
							       Violet-green     |          |          |          |          |
							                swallow |  5 by  5 |        6 | 1 to  6  |   1-1/2  | 10 to 15
									Tree swallow     |  5 by  5 |        6 | 1 to  6  |   1-1/2  | 10 to 15
									Barn swallow     |  6 by  6 |        6 |   [1]    |   [1]    |  8 to 12
									Martin           |  6 by  6 |        6 |       1  |   2-1/2  | 15 to 20
									Song sparrow     |  6 by  6 |        6 |   [2]    |   [2]    |  1 to  3
									House finch      |  6 by  6 |        6 |       4  |   2      |  8 to 12
									Phoebe           |  6 by  6 |        6 |   [1]    |   [1]    |  8 to 12
									Crested          |          |          |          |          |
									      flycatcher |  6 by  6 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   2      |  8 to 20
									      Flicker          |  7 by  7 | 16 to 18 |      16  |   2-1/2  |  6 to 20
									      Red-headed       |          |          |          |          |
									            woodpecker |  6 by  6 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   2      | 12 to 20
										    Golden-fronted   |          |          |          |          |
										          woodpecker |  6 by  6 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   2      | 12 to 20
											  Hairy woodpecker |  6 by  6 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   1-1/2  | 12 to 20
											  Downy woodpecker |  4 by  4 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   1-1/4  |  6 to 20
											  Screech owl      |  8 by  8 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   3      | 10 to 30
											  Sparrow hawk     |  8 by  8 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   3      | 10 to 30
											  Saw-whet owl     |  6 by  6 | 10 to 12 |      10  |   2-1/2  | 12 to 20
											  Barn owl         | 10 by 18 | 15 to 18 |       4  |   6      | 12 to 18
											  Wood duck        | 10 by 18 | 10 to 15 |       3  |   6      |  4 to 20
											  -----------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+---------

											  [Footnote 1: One or more sides open.]

											  [Footnote 2: All sides open.]


											  HOUSES OF SAWED LUMBER.

											  The boy with an outfit of tools at home, or with a teacher of manual
											  training interested in birds, can make all of the houses to be
											  described in this section. Figs. 10 and 11 show simple houses for
											  wrens and bluebirds. Drawings for this type of house are shown in
											  Figs. 14, 15 and 21. While the surfaces of lumber used for these
											  houses may or may not be planed, care must be taken that all pieces
											  are sawed or planed to the correct sizes with edges and ends square
											  and true so there will be no bad cracks for drafts and rain to enter.
											  Be careful to nail the pieces together so that they will not have
											  occasion to crack or warp. A good way to save time and lumber is to
											  prepare a piece of stock, getting it of the right thickness, width and
											  length, and then to saw up this stock on lines carefully laid out as
											  shown in the drawings of the bluebird and wren houses, flicker nest,
											  robin shelf and finch house. The most difficult houses to build are
											  those for martins. In Fig. 45 is given a drawing for a small home
											  arranged to care for eight families, while the photographs, Figs. 8,
											  9, 38, 66 and 67 show larger, finer and more difficult houses. The
											  doors or openings are 2-1/2" in diameter and can be made with an
											  expansion bit or a key-hole saw. All of these houses are to be made so
											  they may be cleaned. Sometimes the bottom is hinged on two screws or
											  nails, and held in proper place by a dowel (bluebird house, Fig. 21);
											  or screwed in place (wren house, Fig. 21, and martin house, Fig. 45);
											  or hinged and held in place by a brass spring (wren house, Fig. 14).

											  [Illustration: FIG. 11. HOUSES FOR WRENS AND BLUEBIRDS.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 12. RUSTIC HOUSES.]


											  RUSTIC HOUSES.

											  The first group of houses of this type are shown in Figs. 12, 35 and
											  36. These are made of slabs of wood with the bark left on, and in some
											  cases, of the bark alone if it can be secured of sufficient thickness.
											  It is usually a good plan to drive a sufficient number of nails into
											  the bark to keep it in place, otherwise it will drop off. Houses such
											  as these attract birds that would avoid a freshly painted imitation of
											  some large residence or public building. Figs. 20 and 37 show houses
											  made of a section of a tree split or sawed in halves, the nest cavity
											  hollowed out, and then fastened together again with screws. The top
											  should be covered with a board or piece of tin to keep out rain. The
											  third division of this type of house is made of sawed lumber and then
											  trimmed with bark or twigs. In this way the same frames may be made to
											  appear as very different bird houses when completed. Such houses are
											  shown in Figs. 30 to 34. Sometimes a pail is used for the frame and
											  then covered with bark, as the center house of Fig. 28. This house has
											  a partition placed half-way up making it a two family apartment, and
											  is provided with ventilating and cleaning devices.


											  CEMENT AND STUCCO HOUSES.

											  Houses may be cast of concrete as Fig. 39. This requires a mold or
											  form, and takes considerable planning to insure success. A form is
											  made whose inside dimensions are those of the outside of the bird
											  house, and of the desired shape. A second form, or core, to be placed
											  inside of the first form, is made as large as the inside of the bird
											  house. The two forms must be mounted so they will remain in the right
											  relation while concrete is placed in the space between them. After
											  this has set, the forms may be removed, cleaned and used again. The
											  roof is generally made separately and put in position last. Or the
											  roof can be cast as a part of the house in which case the bottom is
											  inserted last. Birds do not take as kindly to this type of house as a
											  rule, as to those made of wood.

											  [Illustration: FIG. 13. STUCCO HOUSE FOR MARTINS.]

											  The stucco house has many possibilities. Fig. 38, shows a group of
											  such houses designed to match the general appearance of garages in
											  good residence districts. The frame is made of wood and the stucco
											  applied by one of the methods in use on large houses. Seventh grade
											  boys have made such houses, using 3/8" material for the frames,
											  tacking on wire netting and then plastering each side of the house in
											  turn with concrete. The sides were given a pebble-dash surface, while
											  the roof was finished with a steel trowel to give a smooth surface
											  that will shed water readily, Fig. 13.

											  [Illustration: FIG. 14. (WREN HOUSE)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 15. (WREN HOUSE)]

											  A CAREFULLY PLANNED PROJECT IS SHOWN IN VARIOUS STAGES OF COMPLETION
											  IN FIGS. 15-19.

											  [Illustration: FIG. 16. WREN HOUSE.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 17. ECONOMY OF TIME AND MATERIAL WHEN LAID OUT IN
											  THIS MANNER.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 18. ASSEMBLING BIRD HOUSES.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 19. FINISHING BIRD HOUSES.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 20. (FLICKER HOUSE MOUNTED ON POST OR TREE), (HOME
											  FOR WOODPECKERS), (OUTDOOR NEST SHELF FOR BARN SWALLOWS, PHOEBES AND
											  ROBINS)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 21. (BLUEBIRD HOUSE), (WREN HOUSE), (WOODPECKER
											  HOUSE)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 22. HOUSES BUILT BY STUDENTS AT ST. JOHNSBURY,
											  VT.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 23. (CHICKADEE HOUSE)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 24. WREN, BLUE BIRD AND ROBIN HOUSES.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 25. (FLICKER OR WOODPECKER HOUSE)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 26. (WREN BOX)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 27. (FLYCATCHER HOME)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 28. RUSTIC HOUSES MADE BY ST. PAUL, MINN. BOYS.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 29. RUSTIC HOUSES MADE BY PITTSBURGH, PA. BOYS.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 30. SIMPLE LOG AND BIRCHBARK CONSTRUCTION, HOUSES
											  FOR WRENS, BLUEBIRDS, ETC.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 31. BIRCH BARK HOUSES.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 32. GOOD TYPES OF SMALL HOUSES.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 33. GOOD TYPES OF SMALL HOUSES.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 34. A QUAINT BIRD HOME.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 35. A HOUSE OF CEDAR SLABS FOR JENNY WREN.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 36. MAKING BIRD HOUSES TO ORDER.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 37. CONSTRUCTION OF A WOODPECKER'S HOME. A MARTIN,
											  OR TREE SWALLOW HOME.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 38. STUCCO HOUSES.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 39. CONCRETE HOUSES.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 40. READY TO PLACE FINISHED HOUSES.]




											  PLACING HOUSES.


											  The table given on page 16 states the height from the ground that
											  different species of birds seem to prefer for their nests, to which
											  several suggestions may be added. The houses should be so located that
											  cats and other bird enemies do not have easy access to them. The
											  openings ought to be turned away from the directions from which storms
											  and winds most often come; and the house must hang or tilt so rain
											  does not run in at the entrance. Such birds as the woodpeckers spend
											  most of their time in the trees and so do not take as readily to a
											  house set on a pole out in the open as martins or bluebirds. Flickers
											  are seen on the ground a good share of the time in search of their
											  favorite food, and so will frequently live in houses nailed to fence
											  posts. Houses are more apt to be occupied if placed in position in
											  fall or winter before the spring migration, especially houses made of
											  freshly dressed or newly painted wood. However, such birds as the
											  robin and bluebird rear more than one brood each season and so a house
											  set up in May or June may have a tenant. Figs. 40 to 44 show boys of
											  the University of Wisconsin High School placing some of the houses
											  they had made.

											  [Illustration: FIG. 41. (PLACING HOUSES)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 42. (PLACING HOUSES)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 43. (PLACING HOUSES)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 44. (PLACING HOUSES)]




											  FEEDING SHELVES AND SHELTERS.


											  Nesting boxes make their appeal to but a part of the birds of any
											  community. These attract during the early spring and summer months.
											  Many other species are worth having in our orchards and gardens for
											  their songs and their activity in destroying insects and weed seeds.
											  To these some other attraction than nesting boxes must be offered.
											  Then again, many birds would spend a longer time with us if a certain
											  food supply were assured them. A simple suet feeder is shown in Fig.
											  45. The birds cling to the chicken wire while eating. A feeding box
											  for seed-eating birds is given in Fig. 46. Fig. 47 gives a shelf to be
											  nailed to the sunny side of a building, while Fig. 48 shows a somewhat
											  similar type to be fastened to a window sill, making it possible to
											  observe the birds that come to dine. Birds that hesitate to come close
											  to buildings may be attracted by the feeders set out in the open. Fig.
											  50 shows a feeder mounted on an iron pipe so it can be turned in any
											  direction. This feeder has one end closed by a pane of glass, and is
											  to be turned so that prevailing winds do not enter. Fig. 49 shows a
											  feeding shelf for winter use which makes an acceptable robin nesting
											  shelf in spring. In Fig. 53 is given a feeder mounted on a base with a
											  vane so the adjustment takes place automatically. Figs. 51 and 52 show
											  two food shelters considerably more difficult to construct. They have
											  glass on all sides, and are open at the bottom so that birds can enter
											  or leave at will. Fig. 30 shows a simple food shelter offering some
											  protection against rain and snow, while a very attractive group of
											  shelters are given in Figs. 54, 55, 56 and 57. If you look closely you
											  may see "Mabel" in the right hand feeder in Fig. 54. The builder of
											  these shelters found her so positive about her rights--since she
											  discovered the food supply--that he has been obliged to put up the
											  others to keep peace.

											  [Illustration: FIG. 45. (MARTIN HOUSE), (SUET FEEDER)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 46. (NESTING BOX FOR BLUEBIRDS), (FEEDING BOX)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 47. (FEEDING SHELF)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 48. (WINDOW FOOD SHELTER)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 49. ROBIN SHELF OR FEEDING SHELF.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 50. HILBERSDORFER FOOD HOUSE.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 51. (HOUSE FOR HOUSE FINCHES), (FOOD SHELTER
											  HOUSE)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 52. (SHELTERED FOOD HOUSE)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 53. (ADJUSTABLE FOOD SHELTER)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 54. (FOOD SHELTERS)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 55. WHEN THE SHELTER IS MOST NEEDED.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 56. BIRDS SHOULD FIND THESE FOOD SHELTERS BEFORE
											  BAD WEATHER COMES.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 57. A "JAPANESE" EFFECT.]

											  The window-sill lunch counter shown in Figs. 58 and 61 is a most
											  effective way to study birds at close range. The window selected for
											  this purpose should be on a quiet and sheltered side of the house if
											  possible. If trees and shrubbery are near at hand birds are more
											  likely to be attracted. Branches of thorn apples, alders and
											  evergreens are fastened firmly to the window frames to dress the lunch
											  counter on the outside while house plants or at least a curtain
											  should be placed on the inside as a screen. Fig. 59 shows how
											  particular varieties of birds may be attracted by offering favorite
											  foods while Fig. 60 gives an idea of what kindness will do.

											  [Illustration: FIG. 58. THE BIRD WINDOW SEEN FROM INSIDE THE ROOM.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 59. BLUEBIRDS ATTRACTED TO THE WINDOW SILL BY MEAL
											  WORMS.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 60. A ROBIN ABOUT TO EAT FROM THE CHILDREN'S
											  HANDS.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 61. THE WINDOW-SILL LUNCH COUNTER FROM OUTSIDE.]


											  FOODS.

											  Food shelters become centers of interest in proportion to the number
											  of birds attracted to them. The kind of food placed there determines
											  in time the kind of birds that will be found frequenting them.
											  Seed-eating birds are readily attracted by the use of small grains
											  such as oats and wheat. However, every farmer finds a quantity of
											  weed seeds upon cleaning his seed grain, which proves very acceptable
											  to chickadees and blue jays. Bread crusts or crumbs, crackers and
											  doughnuts may be placed in the food shelter with the knowledge that
											  the birds will eat them. For those of the city who would need to buy
											  seeds, it will be just as well to get hemp, millet, canary seed and
											  sunflower seed, together with the small grains and cracked corn for
											  foods. Suet, scraps of meat and various vegetable scraps, such as
											  celery, lettuce, apples, raisins, and the berries of various bushes,
											  if they can be obtained, are relished. Bluebirds seem fond of meal
											  worms such as develop in old cereals. All birds require water and
											  frequently suffer because this is not to be had. If it is possible to
											  meet this need a great service is rendered. Finally, when the ground
											  is snow covered, many birds appreciate a supply of sand and finely
											  ground poultry grit. Many birds are lost each winter because of
											  insufficient food during inclement weather, that if cared for would
											  remain near neighbors in the summer to wage war upon insect pests.




											  BIRD BATHS.


											  The best bird baths have to meet two requirements: (a) clean, fresh
											  water, and (b) safety from enemies. Almost any shallow dish will meet
											  both requirements if properly placed and cared for.

											  [Illustration: FIG. 62. THE PALM GARDEN EXHIBIT OF BIRD BATHS, ETC.,
											  ST. PAUL, MINN.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 63. (CONCRETE BIRD BATH)]

											  Fig. 62 shows several baths made of concrete. The pedestal and basin
											  are made of two separate pieces, and are cast in a form or mold. A
											  more difficult concrete bath is shown in Fig. 63. This project is made
											  in four pieces. The base consists of two parts, the bottom being cast
											  in a form made of 1/2" or 7/8" stock. The upper part is "swept up" by
											  means of the templet shown, which revolves about an iron rod or a
											  dowel-rod firmly fastened above, and held below in a hole bored in a
											  temporary base of wood. The column is cast in a mold made of sheet tin
											  or galvanized iron run thru tinners' rolls, and held by means of
											  several wires twisted about it. When this is being cast two pieces of
											  iron rod are inserted as shown which are to pass into both bowl and
											  base to make the whole job firm. The bowl may be swept by either of
											  two methods. The first consists of the making of two templets. With
											  the first templet a core of clay is swept up of the desired depth and
											  diameter. Then concrete is placed over this core, which has previously
											  been treated to a coat of oil. Woven wire is cut into a circular shape
											  and bent to approximate the curve of the bowl. More concrete is placed
											  over this, and swept up by means of the second templet. Some
											  difficulty will be experienced in removing the templet if undercut as
											  much as shown; however, the mark where it was taken off can easily
											  be troweled smooth again. The finished pieces are now assembled with a
											  small quantity of "neat" cement in each joint. The second method for
											  making the bowl begins with the making of templets cut on the opposite
											  side of the outline, as compared with the first method. A box is then
											  nailed up and a clay or plaster-of-paris base made. This is oiled, and
											  the concrete put in place. In this case a wetter mixture than in the
											  first case should be used. The second templet is then used to strike
											  off the inside of the bowl. After this has set the pieces may be
											  assembled as before.




											  BIRD ENEMIES.


											  One sometimes wonders that birds manage to exist and to actually
											  increase in numbers. Possibly the first group of enemies should
											  include men and boys who kill adult birds, leaving the fledglings to
											  starve, or who rob the nests of eggs. It is the writer's belief that
											  every boy who makes one or more of the projects in this booklet, and
											  sees it occupied, will become one of a growing number who will care
											  for instead of destroy the birds of his neighborhood. Further, if
											  every man who now thoughtlessly or willfully destroys birds, knew the
											  real money value of the work birds do, he would build or buy houses
											  and food shelters to increase Nature's best friends to mankind.

											  The second group of enemies include ants and other vermin which at
											  times infest nests and nesting boxes, snakes, squirrels, mice and
											  rats. Protection against this group is afforded by bands of tin about
											  the pole, or spikes of wood or metal pointing downward so that access
											  is impossible by climbing up the pole. Another protection is to make
											  the entrance holes small enough to admit only the occupant for whom
											  the house was intended. Of course, the houses for the larger birds
											  must be protected in other ways. Charles Tesch of Milwaukee suggests a
											  sticky fly paper compound made of resin (melted) and castor oil as a
											  preventive for the inroads of the small red ant, if suitable support
											  is available.

											  The final group consists of the two worst foes of bird life, cats and
											  English or house sparrows. If you really value the birds that have
											  been reared in the house you have built you may need to get up _early_
											  more than one morning when the youngsters leave the nest to protect
											  them from the highly respectable (?) tabby that lives possibly next
											  door if not at your own house. It often comes to a choice between cats
											  and birds: and the cats may be disposed of in two ways--the right kind
											  of box traps for the homeless and unknown robbers, and an air rifle
											  with sufficient "sting" for the trespasser from next door. A few
											  lessons of this kind usually have some effect.

											  The English or house sparrow was introduced into this country about a
											  half-century ago. It has spread over practically all of the United
											  States and Southern Canada. Possibly no bird has exhibited such powers
											  of adapting itself to new conditions. The sparrow is no respecter of
											  places for locating its nest. It lives on a variety of foods changing
											  from one to another as the necessity arises. In spite of opposition,
											  this bird is constantly on the increase, so much so that in many cases
											  more desirable native birds have been obliged to leave. The sparrow is
											  filthy and quarrelsome, and lives mainly upon valuable small grains in
											  every case where this is possible. There are two methods possible
											  which afford partial relief: (1) traps and (2) driving them away with
											  an air-rifle. Traps are usually successful for a comparatively brief
											  time, since the sparrows soon associate the trap with danger and so
											  avoid it. A very successful type of woven wire trap is advocated by
											  the Department of Agriculture but is probably beyond the ability of
											  the average boy to make well. It sells by commercial manufacturers of
											  bird supplies for about $4.00. This trap works all the year around as
											  it depends upon the attraction of food. Fig. 65 gives a simple, yet
											  effective trap. However, it requires the presence of some hidden
											  observer to spring it at the right moment. Another type of trap is
											  based upon the nest-house idea. Its effectiveness is limited largely
											  to the nesting season, though it may be used by the birds for shelter.
											  One of the most efficient traps was invented by Charles Tesch, of
											  Milwaukee, Wis. Its principle is that of a tipping chamber leading
											  into a sack thru a chute. Fig. 64 gives the dimensions to be followed
											  in making such a trap. The inventor says that the bag should be far
											  enough away from the box to make certain that the victim has no chance
											  to tell the others what happened to him by chirping, otherwise they
											  will no longer enter the trap. The box must be perfectly tight in
											  order to prevent drafts from issuing thru the entrance which will
											  cause sparrows to keep away. If a few feathers are glued or shellacked
											  to the tipping chamber floor, the sparrow is often attracted more
											  strongly. The bag should be examined frequently to liberate bluebirds
											  and wrens, who may have been caught.

											  [Illustration: FIG. 64. (SPARROW TRAP)]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 65. (SPARROW TRAP)]

											  However, fighting bird enemies without the cooperation of neighbors is
											  not an easy matter. In the case of sparrows, so many more are left
											  that traps alone are ineffective. An airgun properly used offers some
											  help in the city to drive them away from the premises, while a shot
											  gun or 22 caliber rifle are more effective in the country. If every
											  sparrow nest were torn down and no place given them in your
											  neighborhood, the pest is likely to avoid your grounds. Finally, keep
											  nesting boxes free from sparrows while the owners are away for the
											  winter.




											  BIRD HOUSE EXHIBITIONS.


											  Many cities are beginning to do excellent work along the lines of bird
											  preservation and attraction. This usually leads into an exhibition or
											  contest, though many times quantities of houses are made and sold for
											  other purposes, such as raising money for athletic suits for the
											  school teams.

											  At Cleveland, Ohio, a large number of houses such as are shown in
											  Figs. 15-19 were made for the city Bird Lovers' Association to be
											  placed in the city parks. The boys received the profits of the sale
											  after materials were paid for. In the Mercer Center, Seattle, Wash.,
											  the boys wanted suits for the "team." Bird houses were made in dozen
											  lots for a large department store, and soon the boys had all the money
											  the suits cost. Fig. 36 shows a group of 7th grade boys with the
											  houses made in two class periods of two hours each. At St. Paul,
											  Minn., the annual exhibit has become a larger affair than the
											  automobile show. This year it will be held in the city auditorium
											  which seats 10,000 people. The city council will pay the rent of this
											  building for a week and the boys will see that it is filled with bird
											  houses. Up to date (March 11, 1916) over $1,000 worth of orders have
											  been taken for houses to be delivered after the exhibition. Fig. 62
											  shows the palm room at the St. Paul exhibit in 1915. The county making
											  the most bird houses in 1915, so far as has been reported, was
											  Allegheny County, Pa., where approximately 15,000 houses were
											  produced. Fig. 67 shows the prize winners in a department store
											  contest at Pittsburgh, Pa., while an exhibit in the same city is shown
											  in Fig. 66.

											  [Illustration: FIG. 66. THE PITTSBURGH EXHIBIT.]

											  [Illustration: FIG. 67. PRIZEWINNERS IN DEPARTMENT STORE CONTEST.]

											  Space will not permit giving extended rules for such contests since
											  the rules must vary with each city. Briefly, there should be provision
											  made to give all competitors an equal chance. Boys of the 6th grade
											  should meet others of that grade. Prizes may be awarded for the best
											  houses made for the more common birds, such as wrens, bluebirds, and
											  martins. These should be judged as to adaptability or fitness to
											  purpose, amount of protection afforded to birds, good workmanship and
											  artistic merit. A prize might be awarded to the boy whose house has
											  the first pair of birds nesting in it. Prizes may be of many kinds,
											  but tools and books, as well as cash prizes are often given by local
											  business men.




											  WHERE MORE INFORMATION MAY BE OBTAINED.


											  U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Division of Publications: Bird Houses and
											  How to Build Them, Bulletin No. 609; Fifty Common Birds, Bulletin No.
											  513 (15 cents); The English Sparrow as a Pest, Bulletin No. 493.

											  Magazines which have published articles on birds and bird houses: Bird
											  Lore; Country Life; The Craftsman; Elementary School Teacher; Ladies'
											  Home Journal; Manual Training and Vocational Education; Outing;
											  Outlook; School Arts Magazine; Something To Do; The Farm Journal; The
											  National Geographic Magazine; Youths Companion.

											  National Association of Audubon Societies: Leaflets, photographs,
											  advice.

											  Liberty Bell Bird Club of The Farm Journal, Philadelphia, Pa.:
											  Leaflets, books, pictures, supplies, inspiration.

											  Public Library: Reed, "Bird Guide"; Blackburn, "Problems in Farm
											  Woodwork"; Chapman, "Bird Life"; Hiesemann, "How to Attract Wild
											  Birds"; National Geographic Society, "Common Birds of Town and
											  Country"; Trafton, "Methods of Attracting Birds."

											  Catalogs of Bird House Companies: Audubon Bird House Co., Meriden, New
											  Hampshire; "Bird Architecture" Crescent Co., Toms River, N. J. (20
											  cents); Joseph H. Dodson, 728 Security Bldg., Chicago, Ill.; "Bird
											  Houses Large and Small," Mathews Mfg. Co., Cleveland, Ohio; Charles E.
											  White, Box 45B, Kenilworth, Ill.; The Wheatley Pottery, 2429 Reading
											  Road, Cincinnati, Ohio.

